>> National corporate funding
for "Frontline" is provided by
EarthLink.
"Frontline" is made possible
by contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
Thank you.
>> NARRATOR: They want to be
cool.
They are impressionable.
And they have the cash.
They are corporate America's
$150 billion dream.
>> MAN: Teenagers have a lot of
disposable income; they want to
go spend their money.
And, you know, we're more than
happy to make product that they
want to go spend money on.
>> NARRATOR: MTV, Madison
Avenue, and the dream-makers of
Hollywood have targeted our
teenagers.
>> MAN: They look at the teen
market as part of this massive
empire that they're colonizing.
Teens are like Africa.
>> NARRATOR: They are the most
studied generation in history.
>> MAN: If you don't understand
and recognize what they're
thinking, what they're feeling,
you're going to lose.
You're absolutely going to lose.
>> NARRATOR: But what does this
relentless focus on the teenager
do to the culture?
>> MAN: They are going to do
whatever they think works the
fastest and with the most
people, which means that they
will drag standards down.
>> NARRATOR: And to the
teenagers themselves...
>> GIRL: I have to look good for
people.
I need to look good.
>> NARRATOR: Tonight, author and
media critic Douglass Rushkoff
takes a journey through the
complex world of buying and
selling cool.
>> MAN: Okay, so I'm going to
take attendance here.
Christopher?
>> BOY: Here.
>> MAN: Okay.
Hadad?
>> BOY: Here.
>> MAN: Right there, okay.
Adam?
Okay.
You guys can all have a seat
right over here.
>> MARKET RESEARCHER: Has
anybody ever done a focus group
before?
I mean, do you remember what you
talked about?
>> BOY: After-school sports.
>> DOUGLAS RUSHKOFF: On a summer
afternoon, in a downtown New
York loft, corporate America is
on a very serious mission.
>> MARKET RESEARCHER: You know,
it's all going to be sort of,
like, what you guys think.
You guys are sort of the experts
today, and it's going to really
be just you guys telling me your
opinions.
>> RUSHKOFF: These five boys
are here to be questioned about
what they wear, what they eat,
what they listen to and watch.
For $125 each, they're expected
to answer.
>> MARKET RESEARCHER: Tell me
some of the things that are
really hot right now, some of
the things that are really big
right now, popular trends,
things that you sort of see
everywhere.
What's, like, going on?
What's hot right now?
Just shout them out.
>> RUSHKOFF: Okay, so they're no
more responsive than most
teenagers, but that's not going
to stop this market researcher,
because the information he's
looking for is worth an awful
lot of money.
At 32 million strong, this is
the largest generation of
teenagers ever-- even larger
than their baby-boomer parents.
Last year, teens spent more than
$100 billion themselves and
pushed their parents to spend
another $50 billion on top of
that.
They have more money and more
say over how they'll spend it
than ever before.
>> BOB BIBB: Teens run today's
economy.
There's an innate feeling for
moms and dads to please the
teen, to keep the teen happy, to
keep the teen home, and I think
you can pretty much take that to
the bank.
>> SHARON LEE: They're given a
lot of what we call guilt money.
"Here's the credit card.
Why don't you go online and buy
something because I can't spend
time with you?"
>> RUSHKOFF: I'm Douglas
Rushkoff, and tonight we'll tour
through a landscape that has
both attracted and repelled me
during the decade I've been
studying it.
It's the world in which our
teenagers are growing up, a
world made of marketing.
For today's teens, a walk in the
street may as well be a stroll
through the mall.
Anywhere they rest their eyes,
they'll be exposed to a
marketing message.
A typical American teenager will
process over 3,000 discrete
advertisements in a single day,
and ten million by the time
they're 18.
Kids are also consuming massive
quantities of entertainment
media.
75% of teens have a television
in their room; a third have
their own personal computer,
where they spend an average of
two hours a day online.
>> BRIAN GRADEN: I think one of
the great things about this
information age is with so many
channels you can say my business
is 12 to 15, or my business is
21 to 24.
As a result, you have the most
marketed-to group of teens and
young adults ever in the history
of the world.
>> RUSHKOFF: It's a blizzard of
brands, all competing for the
same kids.
To win teens' loyalty, marketers
believe they have to speak their
language the best.
So they study them carefully, as
an anthropologist would an
exotic native culture.
>> ROB STONE: If you don't
understand and recognize what
they're thinking, what they're
feeling, and then be able to
take that in and come up with a
really precise message that
you're trying to reach these
kids with in their terms, you're
going to lose.
You're absolutely going to lose.
>> MARKET RESEARCHER: Is there
anybody in your group of friends
in particular that is, you know,
always really following the
trends?
>> BOY: Not really.
>> MARKET RESEARCHER: No?
So it's just sort of all of you
together kind of keep each other
in check?
Okay, cool.
>> RUSHKOFF: What makes this
market so frustrating is that
they don't operate the same way
as the rest of us.
They're a stubborn demographic,
unresponsive to brands and
traditional marketing messages.
But there is one thing they do
respond to: cool.
Only cool keeps changing.
So how do you map it, pin it
down?
>> MARKET RESEARCHER: As I'm
moving up, stop me when I get
to, like, two years ago.
>> RUSHKOFF: What is cool
anyway?
>> MARKET RESEARCHER: Like right
here?
Okay.
>> RUSHKOFF: The search for this
elusive prize has its own name:
cool hunting.
>> MALCOLM GLADWELL: Cool
hunting is structured around
really a search for a certain
kind of personality and a
certain kind of player in a
given social network.
For years and years on Madison
Avenue, if you knew where the
money was and where the power
was and where the big houses
were, then you knew what was
going to happen next.
And cool hunting was all about a
kind of revolution that sets
that earlier paradigm aside and
says, in fact, it has to do with
the influence held by those who
have the respect and admiration
and trust of their friends.
>> RUSHKOFF: Many companies
don't trust themselves to do
this kind of research, so they
hire experts who can find these
cool kids and speak their
language.
>> DEE DEE GORDON: We look for
kids who are ahead of the pack
because they're going to
influence what all the other
kids do.
We look for the 20%, the
trendsetters, that are going to
influence the other 80%.
>> RUSHKOFF: Dee Dee Gordon is a
sought after cool hunter.
Just 30 years old, she commands
high fees as a consultant to
some of the largest corporations
in America and has been the
subject of a "New Yorker"
profile.
>> GLADWELL: How good is she?
I think she's as good as anyone
is at this game, and it's
something... it's a difficult
thing to quantify, of course;
it's not a science.
It's really a question
ultimately of, how much do you
trust the person who's doing the
interpretation and how good are
their instincts?
And I think, in both cases,
she's at the top of the field.
>> RUSHKOFF: Three years ago,
Gordon and her partner, Sharon
Lee, left the small advertising
agency where they worked to
start their own business, Look-
Look.
>> GORDON: All the photos are
really busy, so somebody has to
shoot a skateboarder in the air
or a cyclist in the air...
>> RUSHKOFF: Gordon and Lee have
put together a team of what they
call correspondents: all young,
all former cool kids themselves.
>> WOMAN: The Slipknot story
came in, and our writer did a
really good job.
>> RUSHKOFF: They're culture
spies, who penetrate the regions
of the teen landscape where
corporations aren't welcome.
>> WOMAN: Can I take your
picture for a street-culture web
site I work for?
>> BOY: Go ahead.
>> WOMAN: I got to get your
piercings.
Can I get your tattoo?
>> GORDON: A correspondent is a
person who's been trained by us
to be able to find a certain
kind of kid-- a kid that we call
a trendsetter or an early
adopter.
This is a kid who's very forward
in their thinking, who looks
outside their own backyard for
inspiration, who is a leader
within their own group.
( boy screaming )
These kids are really difficult
to find.
So what this correspondent does
is they go out and they, like,
find and identify these trend-
setting kids.
They interview them.
They get them interested in what
we do.
They send all that stuff in.
We look at it; we compile it; we
look for trends or themes that
are happening through all the
information, and that's the
stuff that we put on our web
site.
>> RUSHKOFF: For a subscription
fee of $20,000 each, companies
are granted access to the Look-
Look web site-- a Rosetta stone
of teen culture.
If companies can get in on a
trend or subculture while it is
still underground, they can be
the first ones to bring it to
market.
>> GORDON: And that's when the
mass consumer picks up on it and
runs with it and then eventually
kills it.
>> RUSHKOFF: And that's the
paradox of cool hunting: it
kills what it finds.
As soon as marketers discover
cool, it stops being cool.
>> GLADWELL: The faster you pick
up on these trends and blow them
out and show them to everybody
and reveal them to corporate
America, the more you force the
kind of person who starts them
and spreads them to move on and
find the next.
So you simply... there's no kind
of solution to this.
You can't ever solve the puzzle
permanently.
By... by having... by
discovering cool, you force cool
to move on to the next thing.
>> MARKET RESEARCHER: For those
of you who crossed out Madonna,
why did you cross out Madonna?
>> BILLY: She's old.
>> MARKET RESEARCHER: She's old?
>> RUSHKOFF: This creates a
problem for marketers.
Kids begin to see them as the
enemy.
So what do marketers do?
Market to kids without seeming
to do so, become cool
themselves, as Sprite did a few
years ago.
>> MAN: [music] I like the way
you make me laugh
[music] I like the funny things... [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: In the early-'90s,
Sprite was an also-ran brand in
the competitive soft drink
category.
Their focus groups with
teenagers were designed to find
out what was wrong.
>> PINA SCIARRA: What we found
by talking to teens is that they
had seen so much advertising
that they were on overload and
became very cynical about that
traditional approach to
advertising.
>> BRAD HILL: Hi, I'm Brad Hill,
professional basketball player
for the Detroit Pistons.
>> RUSHKOFF: Then they launched
this ad campaign aimed at teens,
which pokes fun at marketing
itself.
>> HILL: Because it's the only
drink with that cool, crisp,
refreshing taste that satisfies
even my manliest thirst.
>> SCIARRA: There was really no
one in the market at the time
that was saying, "Discount it
all.
Don't believe it.
It's all B.S., and we know that
you know that.
And you're smarter than everyone
else."
So, it put them in a position to
feel like we understood them so
that they were feeding back to
us, "You know, Sprite
understands me.
Sprite is one... you know, it's
really one of us."
>> RUSHKOFF: It worked for a
while.
But soon, Sprite's own focus
groups revealed that kids were
getting wise to this anti-
marketing marketing campaign.
>> BOY: They had Grant Hill
telling you not to listen to
some celebrity telling you to
drink a beverage.
>> MARKET RESEARCHER: Right.
>> BOY: Well, that's what you're
doing; you're listening to Grant
Hill telling you to drink
Sprite.
>> MARKET RESEARCHER: Right.
>> BOY: I don't know how much
they probably paid all those
stars to come on and say, "Don't
listen to what a star says."
>> RUSHKOFF: So Sprite crossed
an entirely new threshold into
the innermost sanctum of teen
culture, where they cloaked
themselves in genuine cool.
>> SCIARRA: Hip hop for us
became the sort of vehicle, or
the lens, for us to get to teens
and talk to them in a credible
way.
And the way we did that was to
develop relationships with
artists.
>> STONE: They all of a sudden
put their arm around that kid
that was drinking Sprite and
said, "We understand you; we
recognize you; we want to be
part of your life."
And not just, "Please drink our
product."
They didn't; they almost weren't
even selling the product.
They were selling the fact that
they understood the culture.
>> JON COHEN: They were selling
a lifestyle, and I think that's
why Sprite's been so successful
and one of the leaders in terms
of reaching youth.
>> RUSHKOFF: Former record
executives Jon Cohen and Rob
Stone run a New York marketing
firm called Cornerstone.
They're specialty is under-the-
radar marketing.
For instance, Cornerstone hires
kids to log into chat rooms and
pose as just another fan of one
of their clients.
>> MAN: And that's what the
focus group is about.
>> RUSHKOFF: They also recruit
incoming freshmen to throw
parties, where they pass out
promotional material to their
classmates.
>> MAN: If we're, you know...
maybe we've got a bunch of promo
Busta Rhymes CDs, and that would
be great to give out at the hip-
hop concert.
>> RUSHKOFF: Cornerstone helped
Sprite tap a network of radio
deejays and hip-hop artists to
smuggle their message into the
world of kids.
>> STONE: The days of developing
cute campaigns or whatever
don't... they don't work
anymore.
You have to really get involved
in what their culture is.
You have to understand where
they're coming from.
You have to think how they
think.
>> RUSHKOFF: It worked.
Thanks to the teens who buy it,
Sprite is now the fastest-
growing soft drink in the world.
Sprite invited us to a kick-off
party for their new web site,
Sprite.com.
Scores of kids were paid to show
up and revel in the sounds and
styles of urban authenticity.
While we were there, some of the
biggest acts in rap music
appeared on stage under the
company logo.
Here it was, the ultimate
marriage of a corporation and a
culture.
Sprite and hip-hop had become
one and the same, each carrying
the other to its audience.
>> SCIARRA: Sprite has really
become an icon.
It's not just associated with
hip-hop.
It's really a part of it.
As much as baggy jeans and
sneakers, Sprite has become an
icon in hip-hop culture.
>> RUSHKOFF: Is it nostalgic to
think that when we were young it
was any different, that the
thing we called youth culture
wasn't something that was just
being sold to us, it was
something that came from us-- an
act of expression not just of
consumption?
Has that boundary been
completely erased?
Today five enormous companies
are responsible for selling
nearly all of youth culture.
These are the true merchants of
cool: Rupert Murdoch's Newscorp,
Disney, Viacom, Universal
Vivendi, and AOL/Time Warner.
>> ROBERT McCHESNEY: The
entertainment companies, which
are a handful of massive
conglomerates that own four of
the five music companies that
sell 90% of the music in the
United States, those same
companies also own all the film
studios, all the major TV
networks, all the TV stations
pretty much in the ten largest
markets.
They own all or part of every
single commercial cable channel.
They look at the teen market as
part of this massive empire that
they're colonizing.
You should look at it like the
British empire or the French
empire in the 19th century.
Teens are like Africa.
You know, that's this range that
they're going to take over; and
their weaponry are films, music,
books, CDs, Internet access,
clothing, amusement parks,
sports teams.
That's all this weaponry they
have to make money off of this
market.
>> RUSHKOFF: Of the five media
giants, the coolest conglomerate
on the block is Viacom.
And Viacom's crown jewel, there
on the second floor, is MTV,
which last year earned the
company a billion dollars in
profits.
MTV launched 20 years ago with a
simple but brilliantly
commercial concept: use record
companies' promotional music
videos as creative programming.
Since then, the cable channel
has grown into a youth-marketing
empire, but its basic business
model has remained the same.
>> McCHESNEY: Everything on MTV
is a commercial; that's all that
MTV is.
Sometimes it's an explicit
advertisement paid for by a
company to sell a product.
Sometimes it's going to be a
video for a music company there
to sell music.
Sometimes it's going to be the
set that's filled with trendy
clothes and stuff there to sell
a look that will include
products on that set.
Sometimes it will be a show
about an upcoming movie paid for
by the studio, though you don't
know it, to hype a movie that's
coming out from Hollywood.
But everything's an infomercial.
There is no non-commercial part
of MTV.
>> RUSHKOFF: This strategy keeps
MTV's airwaves filled with cheap
and easy content.
>> MAN: Now he's over there
doing his thing.
Let's check in with him.
All right, let's do it over
there.
>> RUSHKOFF: Take MTV's daily
program "Direct Effects."
See anything familiar?
That's the Sprite.com party we
showed you earlier.
We didn't know it at the time,
but the cameras swirling over
our heads belonged to MTV.
>> MAN: Let's make it happen.
The Sprite.com launch party,
it's crazy.
And right now I've got two of
the hottest in hip-hop for you
right now.
>> RUSHKOFF: So let's connect
the dots.
Sprite rents out the Roseland
Ballroom and pays kids 50 bucks
a pop to fill it up and look
cool.
The rap artists who perform for
this paid audience get a plug on
MTV's show "Direct Effects," for
which Sprite is a sponsor.
MTV gobbles up the cheap
programming, promoting the music
of the record companies who
advertise on their channel.
Everybody's happy.
But while this cross-promotional
free-for-all may maximize
returns for MTV and Viacom, it
also violates the first rule of
cool: don't let your marketing
show.
MTV learned this lesson the hard
way a few years ago when their
ratings began to slip.
>> GRADEN: There was a
perception that MTV had lost its
way a bit with the young
consumer.
Ratings were down somewhat.
Some of the trend studies said
that we were less cool, less
creative than before.
>> RUSHKOFF: So MTV had the
humility to realize that cool
was not their birthright, that
it belongs to kids, and kids
keep changing.
If they wanted to stay cool,
they'd have to change right
along with them.
>> DAVE SIRULNICK: MTV felt like
we needed to get a closer
connection to the audience.
We said, "If we know more about
them-- know more about their
lives, know more about who they
are, what they want, what they
don't want-- we can make a
better MTV that has a better
connection with the audience if
we talk to them and listen to
them a lot more."
>> GRADEN: We immersed ourselves
in research about the fall of
'97 and have been able to turn
that around to where now our
rankings, when it comes to
creative or original or funky or
anything you would care about
musically relevant, have went
way, way up, and our ratings are
their highest in their history.
>> MAN: Five, four, three, come
on!
( applause )
>> RUSHKOFF: The new MTV is all
about learning what kids really
want, then delivering it to
them.
Their signature show, "Total
Request Live," plays music
videos by popular demand.
And every afternoon, mobs of
kids crowd into Times Square to
gaze up at the windows of the
"T.R.L." studio, to see
whichever megaband might be
making a guest appearance.
Today it's a "T.R.L." favorite,
rap metal artists Limp Bizkit,
whose videos are frequently
voted into the top ten.
More on them later.
>> SIRULNICK: It's really the
first time MTV was able to give
over the control of a show to
the viewers and say, "You know
what?
You tell us what you want to
hear, what you want to see, what
the videos are."
And they've been in control of
it since it went on the air.
So I think that's one of the
reasons that it's really
important to us.
And it's really important to the
audience because there's that
real bond.
>> RUSHKOFF: To insure that bond
stays strong, MTV must
understand where teen culture is
moving.
Market research is the mantra,
and its guru is Todd Cunningham.
>> TODD CUNNINGHAM: Some of this
music is dead on for exactly
what kind of stuff that our
audience is going to want.
The research efforts at MTV are
certainly legendary.
There's been a kind of feverish
addiction to research and
understanding young people, and
that's been embraced from the
very top down.
>> RUSHKOFF: MTV let us in on
their techniques.
Todd Cunningham told us to meet
him at an address in the small
town of Iselin, New Jersey.
A short time after we arrived, a
black town car pulled up.
Cunningham, a former advertising
industry executive, emerged with
a member of his staff.
This little field trip,
Cunningham had explained, is
called an ethnography study, in
which MTV market researchers
visit a typical fan in his home.
>> CUNNINGHAM: Hi.
Todd.
>> RUSHKOFF: Today MTV is
meeting John-- an ordinary kid
in every respect who was
carefully screened to make sure
he is just that.
It is hoped that by studying
John in his natural habitat, MTV
might gain insight into one of
the most valuable segment of
their viewing demographic: the
teenage male.
>> CUNNINGHAM: I'd love to see,
like, clothes.
Like, what's your favorite thing
you have?
What's your favorite shirt?
>> JOHN: I don't know.
It's probably one of my
sweaters.
They're in my drawers, if you
want to see them.
>> CUNNINGHAM: Okay, well, we
can look at that in a minute.
What else... what else... what
other kind of things do you wear
usually?
Like, what's...?
>> JOHN: I wear a lot of, like,
khaki pants.
>> CUNNINGHAM: Yeah?
>> JOHN: Mm-hmm.
And... I don't know, I have some
suits for church or whatever.
>> CUNNINGHAM: We shut the door
in their bedrooms and talk to
them about issues that they feel
like are really important to
them.
We talk with them about what
it's like to date today, what
it's like dealing with their
parents, what things stress them
out the most, what things are
like really on the hearts and
minds of them and their peers.
I'm just curious about, like,
things with, like-- you can have
a seat if you want-- just, like,
with your girlfriend and stuff
like that.
We always ask these kind of
questions about are you, like,
how long have you guys been
dating?
>> JOHN: Since June 1.
>> CUNNINGHAM It's captured on
video.
So we have a camera crew, sound
and light crew there.
We cut that videotape together,
put it to music, edit it in an
MTV-style way.
We then take that around and
show it to various department
meetings, share with them the
insights that we've learned.
>> RUSHKOFF: So what happens to
all this careful research, all
the hours and dollars that MTV
spends learning about who our
kids really are?
When all the tape is reviewed,
what portrait of the American
teenage male emerges?
>> BOY: Oh, God!
On my leg.
>> RUSHKOFF: His critics call
him the mook.
That's right, m-o-o-k.
mook.
And you can find him almost any
hour of the day or night
somewhere on MTV.
He's not real; he's a character:
crude, loud, obnoxious, and in-
your-face.
>> TOM GREEN: Nyah-nyah-nyah-
nyah.
Nyah-nyah-nyah.
Whoo, whoo, whoo!
>> RUSHKOFF: He's Tom Green of
the "Tom Green" show.
>> MAN: There's a sewage plant
in Mianus, and it stinks.
>> RUSHKOFF: And he's the
daredevils on "Jackass" who
indulge in dignity-defying feats
like poo diving.
>> MAN: All right, John.
This is poo diving.
>> MAN: Oh, gross!
>> RUSHKOFF: He's those frat
boys and their whip-cream bikini
girlfriends on MTV's constantly
recurring Spring Break specials.
>> PHIL: Hey, Terrence, what
brand of pants am I wearing?
>> TERRENCE: Let me see.
>> RUSHKOFF: He has migrated to
MTV's sister network, Comedy
Central, where he's the cartoon
cutouts of "South Park," or the
lads on the "Man Show."
>> MAN: The juggies look nice,
don't they?
( cheers and applause )
>> MAN: Eat those beans.
Eat those beans.
>> RUSHKOFF: The mook is perhaps
Viacom's most bankable creation.
Once programmers discovered his
knack with teenage boys, they
replicated him across the length
and breadth of their empire.
>> HOWARD STERN: Oh, my
goodness.
She's grabbing my ass.
She's grabbing my ass!
>> RUSHKOFF: Take Howard Stern,
perhaps the original and still
king of all mooks.
Look how Viacom leverages him
across their properties.
He is syndicated on 50 of
Viacom's Infinity radio
stations.
His weekly TV show is broadcast
on Viacom's CBS.
His number one best-selling
autobiography was published by
Viacom's Simon & Schuster, then
released as a major motion
picture by Viacom's Paramount
Pictures-- grossing $40 million
domestically and millions more
on videos sold at Viacom's
Blockbuster Video.
>> STERN: Go ahead, tell me more
about me.
>> RUSHKOFF: So does the whole
teenage experience come down to
this?
Are our boys mooks?
Is John a mook?
I don't think so.
Maybe all that research isn't
really about understanding John
as a person; it's about
understanding John as a
customer.
I mean, they don't call it human
research or people research;
they call it market research.
>> MARK CRISPIN-MILLER: The MTV
machine does listen very
carefully to children.
When corporate revenues depend
on being ahead of the curve, you
have to listen, you have to know
exactly what they want and
exactly what they're thinking so
that you can give them what you
want them to have.
Now, that's an important
distinction.
The MTV machine doesn't listen
to the young so it can make the
young happier.
It doesn't listen to the young
so it can come up with, you
know, startling new kinds of
music, for example.
The MTV machine tunes in so it
can figure out how to pitch what
Viacom has to sell.
>> GREEN: Crotch, crotch,
crotch.
>> RUSHKOFF: There is no mook in
nature.
He is a creation designed to
capitalize on the testosterone-
driven madness of adolescence.
He grabs them below the belt and
then reaches for their wallets.
>> GREEN: Would you watch my
crotch?
>> McCHESNEY: What MTV is
struggling with is what's going
on with all our cultural
industries.
We have fewer and fewer owners
but more and more choices, so
they have to desperately find
ways to keep people looking for
gimmicks, and they don't have a
huge time frame to establish an
identity.
With the remote control, you
know, your shelf life of chances
to keep someone, to get them to
stay there, is very short.
You can't develop a character
for six weeks.
They're going to be gone after
two minutes.
So it puts pressure on
commercial culture providers,
like MTV, to try to find sort of
things that their research shows
will click right away,
recognizable things, and play on
those.
>> RUSHKOFF: It's funny to think
that the most advanced form of
marketing today comes in the
form of a 300-pound body slam.
>> MAN: Yeah!
>> RUSHKOFF: Professional
wrestling is the most popular
form of entertainment among
teenage boys in America.
When I was a kid, wrestling was
an amusing little outpost of the
culture.
Today wrestling is sheer
spectacle, a magnificently honed
lure for the teenage male
channel-surfer.
The wrestlers themselves have a
word for it: "pop."
>> PRO WRESTLER #1: "Pop" means
when that... when the crowd
pops, when then they react,
"Wow."
>> PRO WRESTLER #2: It's like a
shock reaction, you know.
Something that, you know, they
didn't really expect it.
So you may get that big surprise
out of them, you know, just like
when you... you catch somebody
coming around the corner and you
jump out, and they go, "Whoa."
It's the same thing, you know?
>> PRO WRESTLER #1: When
Goldberg spears somebody, it's a
big pop.
You know, "Wow."
>> RUSHKOFF: And where there's
pop, there's money.
That's why wrestling has been
propagated across the entire
spectrum of teen media.
It's broadcast 15 hours a week
on five different networks and
is seen by 15 million people.
Wrestling's violence doesn't
scare me; its ubiquity does.
>> GRADEN: It is huge with our
audience at sort of program
levels that I could of never
imagined.
It is the hottest thing going
among males 18 to 24, and in
fact among teen boys.
And so we felt like while we
don't want it to be the defining
element of our business, it was
okay to be in the game.
>> MAN: It was simply too big to
ignore.
>> GRADEN: That's what it was.
>> CRISPIN-MILLER: When you've
got a few gigantic transnational
corporations, each one loaded
down with debt, competing madly
for as much shelf space and
brain space as they can take,
they are going to do whatever
they think works the fastest and
with the most people, which
means that they will drag
standards down.
>> CHRISTINA AGUILERA: [music] I can't
help myself... [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: And girls get
dragged down there right along
with boys.
The media machine has spit out a
second caricature.
Perhaps we can call this
stereotype the midriff.
The midriff is no more true to
life than the mook.
If he is arrested in
adolescence, she is prematurely
adult.
If he doesn't care what people
think of him, she is consumed by
appearances.
If his thing is crudeness, hers
is sex.
The midriff is really just a
collection of the same old
sexual cliches, but repackaged
as a new kind of female
empowerment.
"I am midriff, hear me roar."
"I am a sexual object, but I'm
proud of it."
>> BOY: Wait.
Wait.
Wait, wait.
>> BRITNEY SPEARS: [music] Ooh,
yeah... [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: The midriff
archetype is undoubtedly teenage
megastar Britney Spears, whose
latest album, "Oops I Did it
Again," has sold over eight
million copies.
>> SPEARS: [music] Show me how
you want it... [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: She hit the scene
at 16 with "Baby, One More
Time," as a naughty Catholic
schoolgirl bursting out of her
uniform.
When it came time for a spread
in "Rolling Stone," THE 17-year-
old self-professed virgin
Britney struck the classic
nymphet pose.
( music playing )
And at the Video Music Awards
last year, when Britney finally
and famously came out of her
clothes, she wasn't just
pleasing eager young boys; she
was delivering a powerful
missive to girls: your body is
your best asset, flaunt your
sexuality even if you don't
understand it.
And that's the message that
matters most, because Britney's
most loyal fans are teenage
girls.
>> SPEARS: [music] I'm not
that innocent. [music]
>> GIRLS: [music] I think I did it
again
[music] We're more
than just friends... [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: We met Barbara and
her friends at the New York
Hilton, where they were
preparing for the opportunity to
step into the roles of midriffs
themselves.
>> BARBARA: I want to be a
model; I want to be an actor.
I want people to notice me and
just be like, "Wow, she is
pretty."
I have to look good for people.
If... I need to look good.
Like, if I don't look good for
people, I'll be really upset,
and it'll, like, ruin my day.
So whenever I go out with
friends, like, even just over to
their house, I need to look
good.
>> RUSHKOFF: Barbara and
hundreds of other girls have
come here to the International
Model and Talent Association's
annual convention.
These girls have paid up to
4,000 bucks a pop for the chance
to be paraded before hundreds of
agents and talent scouts on the
lookout for new blood.
There have always been starry-
eyed girls like this, but what's
new is their sophistication.
They've learned how a midriff
should talk, move, and sell
herself.
>> GIRL: Hello, my number is
7996.
Fruit of the Loom.
I bet you thought they were just
for men.
Well, now there's new Fruit of
the Loom feminine style, because
girls know a good thing when
they see one.
Thank you.
>> RUSHKOFF: Now it's time for
13-year-old Barbara to prove she
has what it takes.
>> WOMAN: Very good head shot.
>> BARBARA: Thank you.
>> WOMAN: Barbara, what do you
feel that your age range is?
>> BARBARA: A lot of people say
I look 17.
>> WOMAN: What do you think it
is?
>> BARBARA: I am originally 13.
I think I can range to 16 or 17.
>> WOMAN: You are 13?
>> BARBARA: Yeah.
>> WOMAN: You're 13 years old?
>> WOMAN: Whoa!
>> WOMAN: What do you want to
really do?
What are you interested in?
>> BARBARA: I would like to
become successful.
( laughter )
>> WOMAN: Good girl.
Good girl.
>> WOMAN: Okay, okay.
>> BARBARA: I want to land a
contract with someone or get an
agent.
>> MAN: Let's say that you go
through this convention and,
like, nothing happens and no
interest, then what?
>> BARBARA: For some reason I
know that if I keep trying, I
might get somewhere.
>> MAN: Yeah.
It was so nice to meet you.
Thanks, Barbara.
Good luck.
>> BARBARA: It was nice to meet
you.
Thank you very much.
>> RUSHKOFF: Barbara's just one
of hundreds in this season's
crop.
It's a bounty for Hollywood
talent agents, who have more
vacancies for new midriffs every
day.
Jeff Marrone has discovered some
of the hottest teen stars in the
business.
Perhaps his biggest discovery
was an unknown teenager named
Jessica Biel.
>> JEFF MARRONE: She was my
client for five years, and I
found her here.
She was onstage.
She was 12 years old.
Most people here weren't
interested in her.
She didn't-- I don't think--
really win any awards.
And she was 12 years old, and
she was... she was, like, way
too tall for her age.
And she was singing the "Lullaby
of Broadway," and, I think,
doing fan kicks or something
like that, and I just went, "Oh,
my gosh!
There's a star."
>> RUSHKOFF: Jessica Biel's
first big part was on a
fledgling television network
devoted to the teenager: the WB.
She played a minister's daughter
on the wholesome teen drama "7th
Heaven."
"7th Heaven" was part of the
WB's newly devised formula,
radical by the standards of teen
television: keep it clean.
>> BOB BIBB: Everyone else was
going to edgy route, so maybe we
ought to go completely
different.
And there was about a year
period where we went family-
friendly.
And I think our slogan was
"Where America's families can
watch television together."
>> WOMAN: You have done so well
at regaining your balance,
getting back on track with your
diet and exercise.
I'm very proud of you.
>> BIBB: That was a novel
approach at the time because,
except for maybe "The Wonderful
World of Disney," families could
not watch television together.
So, you know, programming and
marketing met, and we thought
that's going to be our angle.
>> RUSHKOFF: But the WB's
family-friendly shows had to
compete against programming like
this-- the eye-grabbing sex
scenes of "Beverly Hills 90210"
and other risque teen dramas.
>> Girl: Let's take off all our
clothes.
>> RUSHKOFF: By its third
season, the WB made a course
change.
>> Paula Cole: [music] I don't want
to wait for our lives
to be over... [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: Their new
trajectory: "Dawson's Creek," a
show about a group of sex-
obsessed high school friends in
an idyllic Cape Cod town.
On "Dawson's" first episode, one
of its lead characters, 14-year-
old Pacey, begins a sexual
affair with his teacher.
>> WOMAN: I'm sorry.
>> BIBB: It had attractive
teens, and it spoke to
especially the female audience,
but at the same time the
"Newsweeks" and the "Time"
magazines were writing about
this rather risque show, where a
14-year-old boy was having a
romance with his teacher.
>> RUSHKOFF: You needed that
plot line to really give it a
bang.
>> BIBB: To give it a bang.
>> GIRL: So, Jen, you a virgin?
>> BOY: That's mature!
>> GIRL: Well, because Dawson is
a virgin, and two virgins really
makes for a clumsy first
encounter, don't you think?
>> RUSHKOFF: In bringing teen
sexual content to what had
always been network TV's 8:00
family hour, "Dawson's Creek"
and the WB made the headlines.
However reluctantly, they had
raised the sexual stakes even
further.
What would teens come to expect
from TV now?
Who would top "Dawson's"?
MTV, that's who, by launching a
new nighttime soap unambiguously
entitled "Undressed."
Dispensing with plot almost
completely, its quick-cut,
channel-surf-resistant vignettes
draw their characters so thinly
they nearly disappear.
>> WOMAN: Come here.
>> RUSHKOFF: It's sex TV's
answer to wrestling-- stringing
together explosions of pop to
keep its teen audience hooked.
>> GIRL: I'll give you something
you've been obsessing about ever
since our parents got married.
>> RUSHKOFF: Meanwhile, at the
Cineplex, amped-up efforts, like
"Cruel Intentions," were
bringing unprecedented sexual
sophistication to teen movies.
One of the biggest teen hits of
1999, "Cruel Intentions" is the
story of two spoiled step-
siblings.
She promises to sleep with him
if he will sexually humiliate
her rival.
>> GIRL: You can put it
anywhere.
>> NEAL MORITZ: Right here the
audience will be freaking out.
>> RUSHKOFF: Neal Moritz, the
producer of "Cruel Intentions,"
is one of the most successful
teen impresarios in Hollywood.
>> MORITZ: I mean, I definitely
want to push the envelope with
my movies because, to me, if
you're making the same thing
that everybody else is making,
then you don't have much chance
of getting people to come to
your movies.
And for me, I love making
movies, and the only way I'm
going to get to be able to keep
making movies is by making
movies that do business.
>> GIRL: Down, boy.
>> MORITZ: A movie like I have,
"Cruel Intentions," where we go
off and we make it for $12
million, we do $40 million here,
we do $60 million overseas.
There's $100 million in the box
office, plus all the ancillary
markets, whether it be
videocassette or cable or all
these other markets.
You know, there's tremendous
streams of revenue coming in.
( boy screaming )
>> RUSHKOFF: Moritz's films have
come under intense scrutiny for
their sex and violence.
One was even included in a
government investigation because
it was test-marketed to 11- and
12-year-olds.
Still, he makes no apologies
about going for the jugular.
>> MORITZ: I think what you
can't do is play down to
teenagers, play down to the
young people.
No teenager is going to be
satisfied with a PG-13-rated
horror film, okay?
They want to see the blood and
guts.
That's what they want to do.
They want to see the slasher
element of those films.
And you can't do that the way
they want to see it and get a
PG-13 rating.
>> RUSHKOFF: But even those with
the best of intentions get
caught in the downward spiral of
sex and violence.
We noticed a kind of
schizophrenia on the set of
"Dawson's Creek."
At times, the show feels like
"The Waltons" injected with a
dose of "Beverly Hills 90210."
Two of its main characters are
staunch virgins into their
senior year of high school, but
as if to keep the show cool,
everyone around them is either
having sex or talking about it
incessantly.
>> BOY: Do you guys keep a
running tally of all the losers
you've dated?
>> GIRL: Only the ones we've
slept with.
>> SUSANNE DANIELS: What do you
think kids talk about?
What do you think teenagers talk
about?
Teenagers talk about sex.
Teenagers are consumed with sex.
It is my personal opinion that
teenagers should not be having
sex, but... but they are...
they're confronted with it in
terms of advertising, and they
see it on television in prime-
time shows and, in fact, in
daytime shows.
We have really taken sex
responsibly-- I feel that the WB
has-- and tried to portray
ramifications of it, why and how
and when and where to say no.
>> RUSHKOFF: "Dawson's" writers
and producers are aware that
this is treacherous terrain.
Here they are in a production
meeting, getting a lesson in
accountability from a team of
teen sex experts called the
Media Project.
>> WOMAN: Give me a good
comeback line if a guy says,
"Wearing a condom doesn't feel
good."
( laughter )
>> WOMAN: Oh, come on!
You're writers here!
>> MAN: Oh, I've got it.
I've got one.
"Neither does herpes."
>> WOMAN: Ooh!
>> RUSHKOFF: 28-year-old Greg
Berlanti is executive producer
of "Dawson's Creek."
>> GREG BERLANTI: Why not lean
into the fact that these kind of
topics are being discussed?
Why not be aware of that, and
through that awareness help kids
to redefine and help people to
redefine how they deal with that
information, as opposed to
trying to put another finger in
the dam when it's going to bust?
>> RUSHKOFF: The makers of teen
TV argue that they're only
reflecting the real world.
Sex is a part of teens' lives,
so it better be in their media,
too.
Media is just a mirror, after
all.
Or is it?
>> RICKY MARTIN: [music] Shake
your bon-bon
[music] shake your bon-bon
shake your bon-bon... [music]
>> WOMAN: It seemed everyone
wanted to show off their bum
last year.
>> RUSHKOFF: Take the annual
migration of college and high
school kids to spring break.
For the past 15 years, MTV has
packaged spring break into a
staged television performance,
and then repackaged it through
the year on show after show.
>> JERRY SPRINGER: Hop on and
ride him around!
( cheers and catcalls )
>> RUSHKOFF: Kids are invited to
participate in sexual contests
on stage or are followed by MTV
cameras through their week of
debauchery.
Sure, some kids have always
acted wild, but never have these
antics been so celebrated on TV.
So of course kids take it as a
cue, like here on the strip in
Panama Beach, Florida, where
high schoolers carry on in
public, as if they were on some
MTV sound stage.
Who is mirroring whom?
Real life and TV life have begun
to blur.
Is the media really reflecting
the world of kids or is it the
other way around?
The answer is increasingly hard
to make out.
I'll never forget the moment
that 13-year-old Barbara and her
friends spotted our crew during
a party between their auditions.
They appeared to be dancing for
us, for our camera, as if to
sell back to us, the media, what
we had sold to them.
And that's when it hit me: it's
a giant feedback loop.
The media watches kids and then
sells them an image of
themselves.
Then kids watch those images and
aspire to be that mook or
midriff in the TV set.
And the media is there watching
them do that in order to craft
new images for them, and so on.
Is there any way to escape the
feedback loop?
These kids believe they have.
Downtown Detroit on Halloween
night...
>> BOY: Juggaloes!
>> RUSHKOFF: A few thousand
mostly white young men have
gathered to hear a concert by
their favorite hometown band:
Insane Clown Posse.
I.C.P. helped found a musical
genre called rap metal or rage
rock, which has created a stir
across the country for its shock
lyrics and ridicule of women and
gays.
>> BOY: Yeah!
That's right motherf++ker!
Psychopathic bitch!
Yeah!
>> BOY: Who's going titty
f++king?
>> CROWD: We're going titty
f++king.
Who's going titty f++king?
We're going titty f++king!
Right.
>> RUSHKOFF: Subcultures like
this are increasingly rare in
America, a true underground,
where kids feel spurned by
mainstream culture and like it.
A lot of people seem to... seem
to sense, like, anger coming off
Juggaloes, because there's a lot
of, like, middle finger stuff,
you know.
I mean, who's the middle finger
to?
>> BOY: The middle finger is to
everybody who doesn't understand
what we're doing.
It's to the world.
>> BOY: To the mainstream.
>> BOY: It's to people who don't
understand, the people like
these people who drive by
honking their horns, drive by
laughing at us.
We don't care, and that's who
the middle fingers and the f++k
yous are for.
>> BOY: F++k... I mean, to hell
with society, you know.
I mean, we worry about society
and what they think.
They control what goes on in our
bedroom, you know, what we dress
like, what our hair color is.
Why let it control it here?
This is where we have fun.
( cheers and applause )
>> I.C.P.: [music] Dead bodies
dead bodies
all over the street
[music] 55, 65 bodies at least... [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: Rock music has
always channeled rebellion, but
where it used to be directed
against parents, teachers, or
the government, today it is
directed against slick
commercialism itself, against
MTV.
These fans feel loyalty to this
band and this music because they
experience it as their own.
It hasn't been processed by
corporations, digested into
popular culture, and sold back
to them at the mall.
>> MAN: Everybody that likes our
music feels a super connection.
That's why all those Juggaloes
here, they feel so connected to
it because it's... it's
exclusively theirs.
See, when something's on the
radio, it's for everybody.
You know what I mean?
It's everybody's song.
"Oh, this is my song."
That ain't your song.
It's on the radio.
It's everybody's song.
But to listen to I.C.P., you
feel like you're the only one
that knows about it.
>> I.C.P.: [music] Man, f++k
that bitch... [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: These are the
extremes to which teens are
willing to go to insure the
authenticity of their own scene.
It's the front line of teen
cultural resistance: become so
crude, so intolerable, and break
so many rules that you become
indigestible.
>> I.C.P.: [music] Bitch, you's a ho
and, ho, you's a bitch
come on... [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: Rage rock is a
double-dog dare to the
mainstream marketing machine:
"just try to market this."
And the thing is, that's exactly
what they've done.
Consider the engineered rise of
Limp Bizkit.
Remember them?
It turns out that the nastiest
expressions of youth culture are
manna to an industry ravenous
for anything authentic to sell.
Bizkit is a rage rock band that
leaves critics cold, but ignites
fans with incendiary lyrics.
America first got to know them
at Woodstock '99, rage rock's
coming-out party, as covered by
MTV.
>> LIMP BIZKIT: [music] It's just one
of those days... [music]
>> MAN: The heat burned on, and
conditions grew more
intolerable.
And for some angry concertgoers,
songs like Limp Bizkit's "Break
Stuff" became a mantra.
>> RUSHKOFF: How does a band
like them become superstars?
Follow this well tested recipe.
Always on the lookout for the
rawest of raw material, Jimmy
Iovine, the enormously
successful head of Interscope
Records, finds a controversial
band and packages them for the
mainstream, all the while
claiming he's just responding to
demand.
>> JIMMY IOVINE: There's no way
to stop a... a movement in
popular culture.
There's just no way to stop it.
It's going to happen with or
without you.
There's absolutely no way to
stop that train.
>> RUSHKOFF: But when an Oregon
radio station shied away from
the band's crass lyrics,
Interscope paid them to play one
of Bizkit's songs 50 times.
Then Interscope funded Bizkit's
first video, which was premiered
on MTV's nod to democracy,
"Total Request Live."
>> ANN POWERS: I mean, I guess
you could say "Total Request
Live" is democratic in the way
that, you know, this year's
election was democratic.
The candidates... the field of
candidates is very small, and
there are organizations behind
them-- not unlike the Democratic
and Republican parties-- who are
deciding which candidates get
promoted.
So in other words, you can't
just be, you know, Joe Fabulous
who's releasing your little
indie record and get on "Total
Request Live."
>> RUSHKOFF: Having declared
them worthy of a slot on
"T.R.L.," MTV now also had a
stake in making Limp Bizkit
stars.
The network put the band on
their "Spring Break" special.
( Limp Bizkit playing )
>> MAN: When Spring Break aired,
you could see a sales change the
following week.
And that's the kind of reaction
that a killer performance at
spring break gives.
>> LIMP BIZKIT: [music] Get your ass
up! [music]
>> RUSHKOFF: One part authentic
rage, two parts marketing,
sprinkle with cash, and place in
a preheated oven called
Woodstock '99.
The night after Bizkit's
performance, the festival
erupted in flames.
The band's goading of the crowd
was blamed, perhaps unfairly,
for the mayhem which ensued.
By the time the smoke had
cleared, four young women
reported being raped.
But the band had made the big
time.
Bizkit's lead singer became a
senior vice president at
Interscope Records.
And the band's relationship with
MTV had become so cozy that they
put a picture of executive Dave
Sirulnick in their album liner
notes, and made casual drop-ins
at their old stomping grounds,
"T.R.L."
>> FRED DURST: I just happened
to be in Times Square.
"T.R.L." was going on.
I was, like, "Whoa, what time is
it?"
>> CARSON DALEY: I was using my
little two-way that day, and I
got it right before the show
started.
>> DURST: I two-wayed Carson.
He said, "Come on up."
>> RUSHKOFF: So when it came
time to release a new album,
Bizkit naturally turned to their
friends at "T.R.L." to help sell
it.
And sell it did, faster than any
rock album in history.
>> DALEY: This is kind of an
important moment, you guys being
on "T.R.L."
At some point today, you know,
it's weird to say, millions of
kids will go out and buy this
record.
>> RUSHKOFF: And thus a band is
made.
Of course, it's impossible to
know what would have happened to
Limp Bizkit and rage rock were
MTV and Interscope Records not
behind them.
>> DURST: Hey, what's up?
We're Limp Bizkit, and you're
watching "T.R.L." if you didn't
notice already.
>> RUSHKOFF: Perhaps they would
have made it to the top on their
own merits.
But that's just the point.
No one can ever know, once MTV
and Interscope Records have
placed their bets.
The success of Limp Bizkit and
rage rock was all but
preordained.
The cool hunt ends here, with
teen rebellion itself becoming
just another product.
>> CRISPIN-MILLER: Often there's
a kind of official and
systematic rebelliousness that's
reflected in, in media products
pitched at kids.
It's part of the official rock
video world view.
It's part of the official
advertising world view that
"your parents are creeps,
teachers are nerds and idiots,
authority figures are laughable,
nobody can really understand
kids except the corporate
sponsor."
That huge authority has,
interestingly enough, emerged as
the sort of tacit superhero of
consumer culture.
That's the coolest entity of
all.
>> RUSHKOFF: So is there
anywhere the commercial machine
won't go?
Is it leaving any room for kids
to create a culture of their
own?
Do they even have anything
that's theirs alone?
All eyes are on our kids.
They know they're being watched.
But what or whom can they look
to themselves?
And what if they turn and fight?
The battle itself is sponsored,
packaged, and sold right back to
them.
Oh, and by the way, those rebels
in clown makeup from Detroit?
They've signed with a major
label, produced some slick music
videos, even got themselves on
World Championship Wrestling.
And lo and behold, their latest
album hit number 20 on the
charts.
Welcome to the machine.
>> Explore more of the symbiotic
relationship between the media
and today's teens on
"Frontline's" Web site.
You'll find more on a day in
the life of cool hunters; the
extended interviews; a closer
look at the five media giants
and their clout with teens;
some reactions from teens to
our program; a quiz; streaming
video; and for teachers, a
guide to get your students
engaged in this subject.
Then join the discussion, see
what others thought about the
program, and add your own
comments at pbs.org, or send us
an e-mail at Frontline@pbs.org,
or write to this address:
[Captioned by
The Caption Center
WGBH Educational Foundation]
>> National corporate funding
for "Frontline" is provided by
EarthLink
"Frontline" is made possible
by contributions to your PBS
station from viewers like you.
Thank you.
[Captioned by
The Caption Center]